Founded in 1793, Williams College is the second-oldest institution of higher education in Massachusetts. The campus is home to approximately 2,100 students who develop close intellectual and personal relationships, learning from and alongside some of the world’s leading scholars. Williams’ faculty is devoted to teaching, mentoring, and scholarly research. Williams also offers two graduate programs: a two-year master’s degree in the history of art in partnership with the Clark Art Institute, and a yearlong master’s program designed for economists from low- and middle-income countries. Upon graduation, our students join an extraordinarily devoted body of alumni—the oldest society of alumni in the country—whose financial generosity makes every aspect of a Williams education possible.


Stanford University was founded in 1885 by California senator Leland Stanford and his wife, Jane, “to promote the public welfare by exercising an influence in behalf of humanity and civilization.”

Stanford family
A portrait of Senator Leland Stanford, Jane Lathrop Stanford, Leland Stanford Jr. taken in 1878. (Image credit: Stanford University Archives)
When railroad magnate and former California Gov. Leland Stanford and his wife, Jane Lathrop Stanford, lost their only child, Leland, Jr., to typhoid in 1884, they decided to build a university as the most fitting memorial, and deeded to it a large fortune that included the 8,180-acre Palo Alto stock farm that became the campus. The campus is located within the traditional territory of the Muwekma Ohlone Tribe.  The Stanfords made their plans just as the modern research university was taking form.

Leland Stanford Junior University – still its legal name – opened Oct. 1, 1891.

The Stanfords and founding President David Starr Jordan aimed for their new university to be nonsectarian, co-educational and affordable, to produce cultured and useful graduates, and to teach both the traditional liberal arts and the technology and engineering that were already changing America.

Their vision took shape on the oak-dotted fields of the San Francisco Peninsula as a matrix of arcades and quadrangles designed for expansion and the dissolving of barriers between people, disciplines and ideas.

Olmstead Campus Plan
The Boston firm Shepley, Rutan, and Coolidge collaborated with Frederick Law Olmsted to develop the university’s final architectural plan, with its distinctive arches, quadrangles and arcades. (Image credit: Stanford University Archives)
From the start, stewardship of the founders’ extraordinary land gift has helped support university endeavors, and has made room for a multiplicity of institutes, schools and laboratories that cross-fertilize each other with innovations that have changed the world. Computer time-sharing, the first isolation of highly purified stem cells and the first synthesis of biologically active DNA, among many other breakthroughs, all originated at Stanford.

The early years were difficult, however, as even the Stanfords’ wealth proved inadequate to their vision. After her husband’s death, Jane Stanford kept the fledgling university open through her leadership. The 1906 earthquake dealt a further blow, killing two people and destroying several campus buildings, some so new they had never been occupied.

University benefactor and trustee Herbert Hoover, future U.S. president and member of Stanford’s Pioneer Class of 1895, professionalized university operations in the 1920s and helped to put Stanford on a sound financial footing. He founded an institute to collect global political material – today’s Hoover Institution Library and Archives – and led the creation of the Graduate School of Business, both now world leaders in their respective fields.

Engineering Professor Frederick Terman, dubbed the “Father of Silicon Valley,” left his stamp by encouraging Stanford students not only to develop but also to commercialize their ideas. In 1937, physicists Russell Varian, Sigurd Varian and William Hansen developed the klystron ultra-high-frequency vacuum tube, paving the way for commercial air navigation, satellite communication and high-energy particle accelerators. In 1939, graduate students William Hewlett and David Packard developed the precision audio oscillator, first low-cost method of measuring audio frequencies, and spun it into the company now known as HP. In 1951, the university developed its Stanford Research Park to house firms led by such innovators. Varian Associates became the first tenants.

The Varian brothers
The Varian brothers and William Hansen with the klystron. (Image credit: Stanford University Archives)
The post-World War II era saw many research advances. In 1959, Stanford Medical School moved from San Francisco to the main Palo Alto campus. The 1950s also saw planning of today’s SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, managed under license from the U.S. Department of Energy and opened in 1962. The first website in North America went online at SLAC 29 years later. Advances in particle physics developed at SLAC led to the Linac Coherent Light Source, whose ability to capture ultra-fast images of chemical changes at atomic scale has made it a global destination for pharmaceutical research. The Cold War also gave rise to “the Dish,” the radio telescope that is a familiar landmark in the foothills behind campus. The hill housing the Dish is a conservation area open to the public, and more than 2,000 people run or hike “Dish Hill” each day.

The Dish
In the foothills above campus, the Dish is a radio telescope built in 1966 and still in use today. The area’s trails are used by more than 500,000 visitors a year. (Image credit: Alex Webb)
Deep in the foothills beyond the Dish, a much smaller structure yielded epochal discoveries when it became home to the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL), founded by John McCarthy and Les Earnest in 1965. SAIL researchers devised the first interactive system for computer design, as well as pioneering work on computer vision, robotics, laser printing and automated assembly. The world’s first office desktop computer displays appeared at SAIL in 1971.

In the 1970s, Stanford sought new ways to transform society and preserve the environment. It severed its links to classified defense research and forged new paths for service and stewardship. Stanford reduced its dependence on the automobile by adding campus housing and the free Marguerite shuttle, named after a 19th-century horse that pulled a jitney between campus and Palo Alto. The Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve was designated in 1973 to help preserve the green “lungs” of the Peninsula and access to the biological data compiled there that helped establish the field of population genetics.

The multidisciplinary Stanford Humanities Center, first of its kind in the nation and still the largest, opened in 1980 to advance research into the historical, philosophical, literary, artistic and cultural dimensions of the human experience. At this and 30 other humanities-related centers on campus, scholars ranging from distinguished undergraduates to mid-career fellows create new understandings of the world and humanity’s place in it.

From the start, Stanford has valued experiential education. Generous funding helps its undergraduates of diverse economic backgrounds to enjoy parity of experience and opportunity. In 2015, 85 percent of students received some form of financial assistance and 78 percent of Stanford undergraduates graduated debt-free. More than 1,000 undergraduates conduct faculty-directed research and honors projects each year, while 1,000 take part in public-service projects and 1,000 study overseas, all without regard for ability to pay. Since 1992, all undergraduates are guaranteed four years of on-campus housing, in keeping with Stanford’s emphasis on residential education and the experience of a small liberal arts college within the matrix of a large research university.

A significant physical transformation followed the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, which again challenged the university’s resilience and vision. Stanford’s main Green Library renovated its heavily damaged west wing as the Bing Wing, while the similarly damaged Stanford Art Museum reopened in 1999 as the Iris & B. Gerald Cantor Center for Visual Arts.

In 1985, the B. Gerald Cantor Rodin Sculpture Garden opened as the largest collection of Rodin bronzes outside Paris. It became the nexus for a world-class collection of 20th- and 21st-century sculpture, nearly all of it freely accessible to the public. Today, the museum and sculpture garden are part of a Stanford arts district that includes the Bing Concert Hall, the McMurtry Building for experiential arts learning and the acclaimed Anderson Collection of 20th-century American painting.

Anderson Collection
The Anderson Collection, which opened in 2014, is one of the world’s most outstanding private assemblies of modern and contemporary American art. (Image credit: Alex Webb)
The James H. Clark Center for Biomedical Engineering and Sciences opened in 2003 as the geographic and intellectual nexus between the schools of Engineering and Medicine and the home of Bio-X, a pioneering interdisciplinary biosciences institute led by Professor Carla Shatz. Its collaboration-friendly architecture set the tone for future building, furthering the interdisciplinarity that became a hallmark of university President John Hennessy’s tenure. The environmentally sensitive construction seen in the Clark Center, the Science and Engineering Quad, the School of Medicine and elsewhere fulfills the university’s deep commitment to sustainability in research, teaching and institutional practice. In 2015, Stanford Energy System Innovations’ electric heat recovery system joined the university’s solar and geothermal power procurement initiatives to reduce campus emissions by roughly 68 percent.

The Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford opened in the School of Engineering in 2005, bringing students and faculty from radically different backgrounds together to develop innovative, human-centered solutions to real-world challenges. Using techniques from design and engineering, the institute, known on campus as the d.school, instills creative confidence and draws students beyond the boundaries of traditional academic disciplines.

Development campaigns of unprecedented scope carry forward the Stanford family’s vision. The 2000 Campaign for Undergraduate Education raised $1 billion, while the Stanford Challenge concluded in 2012 after raising $6.2 billion, then the largest fundraising campaign undertaken by a university, to fund bold new initiatives. Meanwhile, the $1 billion Campaign for Stanford Medicine is rebuilding Stanford’s two hospitals for adults and children to advance the mission of precision health.

During 2016, Stanford celebrated its 125th year of transformational impact. A revamped Roble Gym opened with a dedicated “arts gym” to help make art an integral part of the student experience.  “Old Chem,” one of Stanford’s first buildings, received new life as the Sapp Center for Science Teaching and Learning.  The School of Humanities and Sciences launched the Humanities Core, a new certificate and minor program providing undergraduates a structured pathway to explore fundamental questions of human existence. That year, Stanford also expanded its Bing Overseas Studies Program, enhanced undergraduate research opportunities and played a pioneering role in exploring how best to use online technologies to expand access to high-quality education.

The Sapp Center for Science Teaching and Learning
The Sapp Center for Science Teaching and Learning has reimagined the historic “Old Chem” building with an eye toward the interdisciplinary future of science research and education. (Image credit: L.A. Cicero)
Stanford University today comprises seven schools and 15 interdisciplinary institutes with more than 17,000 students, 2,300 faculty and 2,400 postdoctoral scholars. Stanford is an international institution, enrolling students from all 50 U.S. states and 91 other countries. It is also an athletics powerhouse, with 900 current student-athletes and a history of 136 national titles and 26 Learfield Sports Directors’ Cups, awarded to the top intercollegiate athletics program in the nation.

At the 2016 Global Entrepreneurship Summit, hosted by Stanford, President Barack Obama praised the university as “a place that celebrates our ability as human beings to discover and learn and to build, to question, to reimagine, to create new ways to connect and work with each other.”


Nearly 140 years ago, The University of Texas at Austin opened with one building, eight professors, and 221 students. Today, UT ranks among the top 40 universities in the world. It is both a community — more than 51,000 students in 18 colleges and schools, their teachers, researchers and staff — and a nation, Longhorn Nation, with a global network of nearly half a million alumni.

The story of that transformation can be summed up in six turning points that made us who we are...

1883

First-Class by Law
In September 1883, The University of Texas was officially opened in a ceremony inside an incomplete building on a grassy hill where the Tower now stands. Classes that semester were held in the temporary Capitol, a three-story building on Congress Avenue housing state government while the current Capitol was under construction. The following January, students reported to the campus and its one building, a ghost of history now known as Old Main.

But the story of UT starts seven years earlier. It began as an idea, one enshrined in the new law of a frontier state:

“The legislature shall as soon as practicable establish, organize and provide for the maintenance, support and direction of a University of the first class, to be located by a vote of the people of this State, and styled, ‘The University of Texas,’ for the promotion of literature, and the arts and sciences...”
—Texas Constitution, 1876, Article 7, Section 10
Constitution of the State of Texas
Giving further shape to this constitutional mandate, by 1905 the university had adopted a motto — the Latin words “Disciplina, Praesidium, Civitatis.” These were meant to capture a famous sentiment of Texian president Mirabeau B. Lamar: “A cultivated mind is the guardian genius of democracy.”

Tying education to the fortunes of our democracy was the premise of the university from the earliest years. Even the Texas Declaration of Independence in 1836 claimed “...it is an axiom in political science that, unless a People are educated and enlightened, it is idle to expect the continuance of civil liberty, or the capacity for self-government.”

University of Texas at Austin seal in stone
Round table discussion at the LBJ School with leaders from Strauss Center & Clements Center on the Intelligence Project
This spirit of public service and leadership can be seen in the biographies of alumni like Sam Rayburn, the longest-serving speaker of the House in U.S. history, and numerous governors and cabinet officials. It is seen in the establishment of the LBJ School of Public Affairs, the Strauss Center for International Law, the Clements Center for National Security, and three ROTC programs.

FROM TOP-LEFT: The UT Main Building and Tower under construction in 1936. The Constitution of the State of Texas, established 1876. The seal of the university carved in limestone. Round table discussion at the LBJ School with leaders from Strauss Center & Clements Center on the Intelligence Project.

1923

Fueling Growth
UT might have been built on high ideals and aspirations, but ideals don’t pay for professors or for buildings; money does. In 1882, at a ceremony to lay cornerstone for the university, Ashbel Smith, first chairman of the Board of Regents, said, “Smite the rocks with the rod of knowledge, and fountains of unstinted wealth will gush forth.”

Those rocks were smitten May 28, 1923, when an oil rig named Santa Rita No. 1 “came in” on West Texas land the state had set aside to help fund education, spraying oil over a 250-yard area around the well. A new day had dawned for the university.

Collage image of Santa Rita oil rig, Ashbel Smith portrait, and a UT Austin cornerstone from 1882
Black & white photo of UT Tower construction in the 1920s
Because the fund treated oil profits as principal rather than income, the proceeds from Santa Rita and other wells were reinvested instead of being spent, and by 1925 the Permanent University Fund was growing by more than $2,000 a day. It is no coincidence that during the 1920s and 1930s, 23 buildings went up to create the core of the campus, including UT’s most famous, the Tower.

FROM TOP-LEFT: Santa Rita No. 1 comes in. UT’s first regent chair Ashbel Smith. The cornerstone he dedicated in 1882 is still on view outside UT’s Main Building. UT’s Main Building and Tower under construction in the mid-1930s.

1929

The Research University
UT’s earliest faculty leaders had gambled that a move to Texas, then little more than a wilderness, would be good. By the early-to-mid 20th century, the campus was roamed by intellectual giants like historian Walter Webb, folklorists J. Frank Dobie and Americo Paredes, and Nobel laureate biologist Hermann Muller.

Association of American Universities sealIn 1929, the Association of American Universities confirmed that UT was indeed a university of the first class when the AAU invited UT into membership. In Texas, only three universities are AAU members, and UT was the first by more than 50 years.

Since then, Congresswoman Barbara Jordan, Maya scholar Linda Schele, and Nobel laureates physicist Steven Weinberg and chemist Ilya Prigogine have further burnished the UT faculty’s global reputation.

Walter Webb
Frank Dobie
Americo Paredes
Hermann Muller
Barbara Jordan
Linda Schele
Steven Weinberg
Ilya Prigogine
Server room at the Texas Advanced Computing Center
Today, UT receives about $800 million a year for research, much of it from federal sources, led by the Department of Defense. UT does “big science.” It has built some of the world’s fastest computers and is a charter member of a consortium building the world’s largest telescope.

FROM TOP-LEFT: Historian Walter Webb, folklorists J. Frank Dobie and Americo Paredes, and Nobel laureate biologist Hermann Muller. Congresswoman Barbara Jordan and Maya scholar Linda Schele. Nobel laureates physicist Steven Weinberg and chemist Ilya Prigogine. One of the world’s fastest supercomputers at UT’s Texas Advanced Computing Center.

1950

A Wider Embrace
Herman Sweatt waiting in line to become the university's first black student
In 1950, no flagship university in the former Confederacy admitted black students. That year, the lawsuit of a postman who wanted to earn a law degree at Texas worked its way to the Supreme Court. UT fought integration, but Heman Sweatt prevailed and became the university’s first black student. Sweatt v. Painter became the critical precedent to the Brown case, which finally ended the fallacy of “separate but equal” and began in earnest the slow process of integration.

Twice in the years since Sweatt, UT has gone to bat for the right of universities to affirmatively consider race in admissions. In both the Hopwood case in the 1990s and the Fisher case in the 2010s, the university argued that racial diversity benefited all students, and the Supreme Court agreed.

Because of this history of segregation, UT understands the profound benefits of creating an inclusive environment in which students can learn from one another. The educational benefits of learning on a diverse campus prepare all students to succeed in an increasingly diverse state and interconnected society.

UT President Greg Fenves in front of the Supreme Court defending UT admissions process
Smiling group of UT students wearing burnt orange shirts
FROM TOP-LEFT: Heman Sweatt registering for courses at the UT Law School in 1950 (Courtesy UT Dolph Briscoe Center for American History). President Gregory L. Fenves comments on the case of Fisher v. The University of Texas at Austin at the U.S. Supreme Court in 2015. Members of the Class of 2019.

1963

The Age of Titans
The year 1963 marked the first time two very different men who made a gigantic impact on the university’s modern character both were in power: Harry Ransom and Frank Erwin.

Harry Ransom came to UT in 1935 to teach English, rose through the ranks, and in 1960 was appointed president, then chancellor of the UT System.

Portrait of Harry Ransom
Portrait of Frank Erwin
The Gutenberg Bible
The erudite Ransom had an audacious vision for what the university should be academically, including being a center for globally important cultural holdings like the Gutenberg Bible now housed in the humanities research center that bears his name.

From the time Frank Erwin was named a regent in 1963 until his death in 1983, UT essentially became the university we see today.

Black & white collage of students protesting, Frank Erwin sitting in corner
Its student population rose from 22,000 to 41,500. Its legislative appropriations rose from $16 million to $100 million, and the campus completed 55 major building projects. Erwin accomplished this transformation through ceaseless work but also powerful connections to the Governor’s Mansion and the White House.

Erwin was viewed by some as heavy handed and remains a polarizing figure to this day, but his influence on the university might never been matched.

Coach Darrell Royal
The heady 1960s also established UT’s place in the pantheon of collegiate sports, when Coach Darrell Royal led the Longhorns to three national football championships in 1963, 1969 and 1970. They would go on to win another in the 2005 season.

FROM TOP-LEFT: President Harry Ransom. Chairman Frank Erwin. One of 20 surviving copies of the first book printed using moveable type, the Gutenberg Bible was made in the 1450s and acquired by UT in 1978. Students protest the cutting down of trees along Waller Creek in 1969. Coach Darrell Royal (Courtesy UT Press).

2012

A Medical School Comes to the Flagship
By 2012, Austin had become the 11th largest city in America — larger than San Francisco, Boston or Seattle. And it was the largest by far not to have a medical school and teaching hospital. Community leaders, led by state senator Kirk Watson, wanted a medical school to improve health locally. University leaders wanted a medical school for all the good synergies it would create.

City of Austin skyline from UT Tower observation deck in 1936
View of downtown Austin from the UT Tower
When citizens of Travis County voted for a tax to support a school and teaching hospital, Michael and Susan Dell stepped forward with a gift of $50 million, and the Dell Medical School at UT was born, welcoming its first class of future doctors in 2016.

Dell Med is setting itself apart with the audacious goal of changing health care itself and is already a game-changing asset to Central Texas and the university.

Did the people who lived the history of these six years know they would shape the character of the institution? More importantly, what will be the next year that will change Texas?

Health Learning Building exterior at UT Austin
Dell Medical School students engaged in cross-disciplinary discussion on project
Health Discovery Building exterior at UT Austin
FROM TOP-LEFT: Downtown Austin as seen from the Tower Observation Deck. Dell Medical School Health Learning Building. Dell Med students. Dell Medical School Health Discovery Building (courtesy Dell Medical School).